
Neural Style Transfer
=====================

If you are a photography enthusiast, you may be familiar with the
filter. It can change the color style of photos so that landscape photos
become sharper or portrait photos have whitened skins. However, one
filter usually only changes one aspect of the photo. To apply an ideal
style to a photo, you probably need to try many different filter
combinations. This process is as complex as tuning the hyperparameters
of a model.

In this section, we will leverage layerwise representations of a CNN to
automatically apply the style of one image to another image, i.e.,
*style transfer* :cite:`Gatys.Ecker.Bethge.2016`. This task needs two
input images: one is the *content image* and the other is the *style
image*. We will use neural networks to modify the content image to make
it close to the style image in style. For example, the content image in
:numref:`fig_style_transfer` is a landscape photo taken by us in Mount
Rainier National Park in the suburbs of Seattle, while the style image
is an oil painting with the theme of autumn oak trees. In the output
synthesized image, the oil brush strokes of the style image are applied,
leading to more vivid colors, while preserving the main shape of the
objects in the content image.

.. _fig_style_transfer:

.. figure:: ../img/style-transfer.svg

   Given content and style images, style transfer outputs a synthesized
   image.


Method
------

:numref:`fig_style_transfer_model` illustrates the CNN-based style
transfer method with a simplified example. First, we initialize the
synthesized image, for example, into the content image. This synthesized
image is the only variable that needs to be updated during the style
transfer process, i.e., the model parameters to be updated during
training. Then we choose a pretrained CNN to extract image features and
freeze its model parameters during training. This deep CNN uses multiple
layers to extract hierarchical features for images. We can choose the
output of some of these layers as content features or style features.
Take :numref:`fig_style_transfer_model` as an example. The pretrained
neural network here has 3 convolutional layers, where the second layer
outputs the content features, and the first and third layers output the
style features.

.. _fig_style_transfer_model:

.. figure:: ../img/neural-style.svg

   CNN-based style transfer process. Solid lines show the direction of
   forward propagation and dotted lines show backward propagation.


Next, we calculate the loss function of style transfer through forward
propagation (direction of solid arrows), and update the model parameters
(the synthesized image for output) through backpropagation (direction of
dashed arrows). The loss function commonly used in style transfer
consists of three parts: (i) *content loss* makes the synthesized image
and the content image close in content features; (ii) *style loss* makes
the synthesized image and style image close in style features; and (iii)
*total variation loss* helps to reduce the noise in the synthesized
image. Finally, when the model training is over, we output the model
parameters of the style transfer to generate the final synthesized
image.

In the following, we will explain the technical details of style
transfer via a concrete experiment.

Reading the Content and Style Images
------------------------------------

First, we read the content and style images. From their printed
coordinate axes, we can tell that these images have different sizes.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-1-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-1-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-1-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import torch
    import torchvision
    from torch import nn
    from d2l import torch as d2l
    
    d2l.set_figsize()
    content_img = d2l.Image.open('../img/rainier.jpg')
    d2l.plt.imshow(content_img);
    
    style_img = d2l.Image.open('../img/autumn-oak.jpg')
    d2l.plt.imshow(style_img);



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-1-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    from mxnet import autograd, gluon, image, init, np, npx
    from mxnet.gluon import nn
    from d2l import mxnet as d2l
    
    npx.set_np()
    
    d2l.set_figsize()
    content_img = image.imread('../img/rainier.jpg')
    d2l.plt.imshow(content_img.asnumpy());
    
    style_img = image.imread('../img/autumn-oak.jpg')
    d2l.plt.imshow(style_img.asnumpy());



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Preprocessing and Postprocessing
--------------------------------

Below, we define two functions for preprocessing and postprocessing
images. The ``preprocess`` function standardizes each of the three RGB
channels of the input image and transforms the results into the CNN
input format. The ``postprocess`` function restores the pixel values in
the output image to their original values before standardization. Since
the image printing function requires that each pixel has a floating
point value from 0 to 1, we replace any value smaller than 0 or greater
than 1 with 0 or 1, respectively.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-3-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-3-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-3-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    rgb_mean = torch.tensor([0.485, 0.456, 0.406])
    rgb_std = torch.tensor([0.229, 0.224, 0.225])
    
    def preprocess(img, image_shape):
        transforms = torchvision.transforms.Compose([
            torchvision.transforms.Resize(image_shape),
            torchvision.transforms.ToTensor(),
            torchvision.transforms.Normalize(mean=rgb_mean, std=rgb_std)])
        return transforms(img).unsqueeze(0)
    
    def postprocess(img):
        img = img[0].to(rgb_std.device)
        img = torch.clamp(img.permute(1, 2, 0) * rgb_std + rgb_mean, 0, 1)
        return torchvision.transforms.ToPILImage()(img.permute(2, 0, 1))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-3-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    rgb_mean = np.array([0.485, 0.456, 0.406])
    rgb_std = np.array([0.229, 0.224, 0.225])
    
    def preprocess(img, image_shape):
        img = image.imresize(img, *image_shape)
        img = (img.astype('float32') / 255 - rgb_mean) / rgb_std
        return np.expand_dims(img.transpose(2, 0, 1), axis=0)
    
    def postprocess(img):
        img = img[0].as_in_ctx(rgb_std.ctx)
        return (img.transpose(1, 2, 0) * rgb_std + rgb_mean).clip(0, 1)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Extracting Features
-------------------

We use the VGG-19 model pretrained on the ImageNet dataset to extract
image features :cite:`Gatys.Ecker.Bethge.2016`.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-5-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-5-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-5-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    pretrained_net = torchvision.models.vgg19(pretrained=True)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-5-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    pretrained_net = gluon.model_zoo.vision.vgg19(pretrained=True)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

In order to extract the content features and style features of the
image, we can select the output of certain layers in the VGG network.
Generally speaking, the closer to the input layer, the easier to extract
details of the image, and vice versa, the easier to extract the global
information of the image. In order to avoid excessively retaining the
details of the content image in the synthesized image, we choose a VGG
layer that is closer to the output as the *content layer* to output the
content features of the image. We also select the output of different
VGG layers for extracting local and global style features. These layers
are also called *style layers*. As mentioned in :numref:`sec_vgg`, the
VGG network uses 5 convolutional blocks. In the experiment, we choose
the last convolutional layer of the fourth convolutional block as the
content layer, and the first convolutional layer of each convolutional
block as the style layer. The indices of these layers can be obtained by
printing the ``pretrained_net`` instance.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-7-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-7-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-7-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    style_layers, content_layers = [0, 5, 10, 19, 28], [25]



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-7-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    style_layers, content_layers = [0, 5, 10, 19, 28], [25]



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

When extracting features using VGG layers, we only need to use all those
from the input layer to the content layer or style layer that is closest
to the output layer. Let’s construct a new network instance ``net``,
which only retains all the VGG layers to be used for feature extraction.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-9-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-9-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-9-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    net = nn.Sequential(*[pretrained_net.features[i] for i in
                          range(max(content_layers + style_layers) + 1)])



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-9-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    net = nn.Sequential()
    for i in range(max(content_layers + style_layers) + 1):
        net.add(pretrained_net.features[i])



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Given the input ``X``, if we simply invoke the forward propagation
``net(X)``, we can only get the output of the last layer. Since we also
need the outputs of intermediate layers, we need to perform
layer-by-layer computation and keep the content and style layer outputs.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-11-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-11-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-11-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def extract_features(X, content_layers, style_layers):
        contents = []
        styles = []
        for i in range(len(net)):
            X = net[i](X)
            if i in style_layers:
                styles.append(X)
            if i in content_layers:
                contents.append(X)
        return contents, styles



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-11-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def extract_features(X, content_layers, style_layers):
        contents = []
        styles = []
        for i in range(len(net)):
            X = net[i](X)
            if i in style_layers:
                styles.append(X)
            if i in content_layers:
                contents.append(X)
        return contents, styles



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Two functions are defined below: the ``get_contents`` function extracts
content features from the content image, and the ``get_styles`` function
extracts style features from the style image. Since there is no need to
update the model parameters of the pretrained VGG during training, we
can extract the content and the style features even before the training
starts. Since the synthesized image is a set of model parameters to be
updated for style transfer, we can only extract the content and style
features of the synthesized image by calling the ``extract_features``
function during training.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-13-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-13-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-13-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def get_contents(image_shape, device):
        content_X = preprocess(content_img, image_shape).to(device)
        contents_Y, _ = extract_features(content_X, content_layers, style_layers)
        return content_X, contents_Y
    
    def get_styles(image_shape, device):
        style_X = preprocess(style_img, image_shape).to(device)
        _, styles_Y = extract_features(style_X, content_layers, style_layers)
        return style_X, styles_Y



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-13-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def get_contents(image_shape, device):
        content_X = preprocess(content_img, image_shape).copyto(device)
        contents_Y, _ = extract_features(content_X, content_layers, style_layers)
        return content_X, contents_Y
    
    def get_styles(image_shape, device):
        style_X = preprocess(style_img, image_shape).copyto(device)
        _, styles_Y = extract_features(style_X, content_layers, style_layers)
        return style_X, styles_Y



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Defining the Loss Function
--------------------------

Now we will describe the loss function for style transfer. The loss
function consists of the content loss, style loss, and total variation
loss.

Content Loss
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Similar to the loss function in linear regression, the content loss
measures the difference in content features between the synthesized
image and the content image via the squared loss function. The two
inputs of the squared loss function are both outputs of the content
layer computed by the ``extract_features`` function.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-15-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-15-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-15-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def content_loss(Y_hat, Y):
        # We detach the target content from the tree used to dynamically compute
        # the gradient: this is a stated value, not a variable. Otherwise the loss
        # will throw an error.
        return torch.square(Y_hat - Y.detach()).mean()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-15-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def content_loss(Y_hat, Y):
        return np.square(Y_hat - Y).mean()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Style Loss
~~~~~~~~~~

Style loss, similar to content loss, also uses the squared loss function
to measure the difference in style between the synthesized image and the
style image. To express the style output of any style layer, we first
use the ``extract_features`` function to compute the style layer output.
Suppose that the output has 1 example, :math:`c` channels, height
:math:`h`, and width :math:`w`, we can transform this output into matrix
:math:`\mathbf{X}` with :math:`c` rows and :math:`hw` columns. This
matrix can be thought of as the concatenation of :math:`c` vectors
:math:`\mathbf{x}_1, \ldots, \mathbf{x}_c`, each of which has a length
of :math:`hw`. Here, vector :math:`\mathbf{x}_i` represents the style
feature of channel :math:`i`.

In the *Gram matrix* of these vectors
:math:`\mathbf{X}\mathbf{X}^\top \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times c}`, element
:math:`x_{ij}` in row :math:`i` and column :math:`j` is the dot product
of vectors :math:`\mathbf{x}_i` and :math:`\mathbf{x}_j`. It represents
the correlation of the style features of channels :math:`i` and
:math:`j`. We use this Gram matrix to represent the style output of any
style layer. Note that when the value of :math:`hw` is larger, it likely
leads to larger values in the Gram matrix. Note also that the height and
width of the Gram matrix are both the number of channels :math:`c`. To
allow style loss not to be affected by these values, the ``gram``
function below divides the Gram matrix by the number of its elements,
i.e., :math:`chw`.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-17-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-17-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-17-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def gram(X):
        num_channels, n = X.shape[1], X.numel() // X.shape[1]
        X = X.reshape((num_channels, n))
        return torch.matmul(X, X.T) / (num_channels * n)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-17-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def gram(X):
        num_channels, n = X.shape[1], d2l.size(X) // X.shape[1]
        X = X.reshape((num_channels, n))
        return np.dot(X, X.T) / (num_channels * n)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Obviously, the two Gram matrix inputs of the squared loss function for
style loss are based on the style layer outputs for the synthesized
image and the style image. It is assumed here that the Gram matrix
``gram_Y`` based on the style image has been precomputed.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-19-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-19-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-19-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def style_loss(Y_hat, gram_Y):
        return torch.square(gram(Y_hat) - gram_Y.detach()).mean()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-19-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def style_loss(Y_hat, gram_Y):
        return np.square(gram(Y_hat) - gram_Y).mean()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Total Variation Loss
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes, the learned synthesized image has a lot of high-frequency
noise, i.e., particularly bright or dark pixels. One common noise
reduction method is *total variation denoising*. Denote by
:math:`x_{i, j}` the pixel value at coordinate :math:`(i, j)`. Reducing
total variation loss

.. math:: \sum_{i, j} \left|x_{i, j} - x_{i+1, j}\right| + \left|x_{i, j} - x_{i, j+1}\right|

makes values of neighboring pixels on the synthesized image closer.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-21-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-21-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-21-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def tv_loss(Y_hat):
        return 0.5 * (torch.abs(Y_hat[:, :, 1:, :] - Y_hat[:, :, :-1, :]).mean() +
                      torch.abs(Y_hat[:, :, :, 1:] - Y_hat[:, :, :, :-1]).mean())



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-21-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def tv_loss(Y_hat):
        return 0.5 * (np.abs(Y_hat[:, :, 1:, :] - Y_hat[:, :, :-1, :]).mean() +
                      np.abs(Y_hat[:, :, :, 1:] - Y_hat[:, :, :, :-1]).mean())



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Loss Function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The loss function of style transfer is the weighted sum of content loss,
style loss, and total variation loss. By adjusting these weight
hyperparameters, we can balance among content retention, style transfer,
and noise reduction on the synthesized image.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-23-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-23-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-23-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    content_weight, style_weight, tv_weight = 1, 1e4, 10
    
    def compute_loss(X, contents_Y_hat, styles_Y_hat, contents_Y, styles_Y_gram):
        # Calculate the content, style, and total variance losses respectively
        contents_l = [content_loss(Y_hat, Y) * content_weight for Y_hat, Y in zip(
            contents_Y_hat, contents_Y)]
        styles_l = [style_loss(Y_hat, Y) * style_weight for Y_hat, Y in zip(
            styles_Y_hat, styles_Y_gram)]
        tv_l = tv_loss(X) * tv_weight
        # Add up all the losses
        l = sum(styles_l + contents_l + [tv_l])
        return contents_l, styles_l, tv_l, l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-23-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    content_weight, style_weight, tv_weight = 1, 1e4, 10
    
    def compute_loss(X, contents_Y_hat, styles_Y_hat, contents_Y, styles_Y_gram):
        # Calculate the content, style, and total variance losses respectively
        contents_l = [content_loss(Y_hat, Y) * content_weight for Y_hat, Y in zip(
            contents_Y_hat, contents_Y)]
        styles_l = [style_loss(Y_hat, Y) * style_weight for Y_hat, Y in zip(
            styles_Y_hat, styles_Y_gram)]
        tv_l = tv_loss(X) * tv_weight
        # Add up all the losses
        l = sum(styles_l + contents_l + [tv_l])
        return contents_l, styles_l, tv_l, l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Initializing the Synthesized Image
----------------------------------

In style transfer, the synthesized image is the only variable that needs
to be updated during training. Thus, we can define a simple model,
``SynthesizedImage``, and treat the synthesized image as the model
parameters. In this model, forward propagation just returns the model
parameters.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-25-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-25-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-25-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class SynthesizedImage(nn.Module):
        def __init__(self, img_shape, **kwargs):
            super(SynthesizedImage, self).__init__(**kwargs)
            self.weight = nn.Parameter(torch.rand(*img_shape))
    
        def forward(self):
            return self.weight



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-25-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class SynthesizedImage(nn.Block):
        def __init__(self, img_shape, **kwargs):
            super(SynthesizedImage, self).__init__(**kwargs)
            self.weight = self.params.get('weight', shape=img_shape)
    
        def forward(self):
            return self.weight.data()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Next, we define the ``get_inits`` function. This function creates a
synthesized image model instance and initializes it to the image ``X``.
Gram matrices for the style image at various style layers,
``styles_Y_gram``, are computed prior to training.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-27-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-27-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-27-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def get_inits(X, device, lr, styles_Y):
        gen_img = SynthesizedImage(X.shape).to(device)
        gen_img.weight.data.copy_(X.data)
        trainer = torch.optim.Adam(gen_img.parameters(), lr=lr)
        styles_Y_gram = [gram(Y) for Y in styles_Y]
        return gen_img(), styles_Y_gram, trainer



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-27-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def get_inits(X, device, lr, styles_Y):
        gen_img = SynthesizedImage(X.shape)
        gen_img.initialize(init.Constant(X), ctx=device, force_reinit=True)
        trainer = gluon.Trainer(gen_img.collect_params(), 'adam',
                                {'learning_rate': lr})
        styles_Y_gram = [gram(Y) for Y in styles_Y]
        return gen_img(), styles_Y_gram, trainer



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Training
--------

When training the model for style transfer, we continuously extract
content features and style features of the synthesized image, and
calculate the loss function. Below defines the training loop.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-29-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-29-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-29-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def train(X, contents_Y, styles_Y, device, lr, num_epochs, lr_decay_epoch):
        X, styles_Y_gram, trainer = get_inits(X, device, lr, styles_Y)
        scheduler = torch.optim.lr_scheduler.StepLR(trainer, lr_decay_epoch, 0.8)
        animator = d2l.Animator(xlabel='epoch', ylabel='loss',
                                xlim=[10, num_epochs],
                                legend=['content', 'style', 'TV'],
                                ncols=2, figsize=(7, 2.5))
        for epoch in range(num_epochs):
            trainer.zero_grad()
            contents_Y_hat, styles_Y_hat = extract_features(
                X, content_layers, style_layers)
            contents_l, styles_l, tv_l, l = compute_loss(
                X, contents_Y_hat, styles_Y_hat, contents_Y, styles_Y_gram)
            l.backward()
            trainer.step()
            scheduler.step()
            if (epoch + 1) % 10 == 0:
                animator.axes[1].imshow(postprocess(X))
                animator.add(epoch + 1, [float(sum(contents_l)),
                                         float(sum(styles_l)), float(tv_l)])
        return X



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-29-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def train(X, contents_Y, styles_Y, device, lr, num_epochs, lr_decay_epoch):
        X, styles_Y_gram, trainer = get_inits(X, device, lr, styles_Y)
        animator = d2l.Animator(xlabel='epoch', ylabel='loss',
                                xlim=[10, num_epochs], ylim=[0, 20],
                                legend=['content', 'style', 'TV'],
                                ncols=2, figsize=(7, 2.5))
        for epoch in range(num_epochs):
            with autograd.record():
                contents_Y_hat, styles_Y_hat = extract_features(
                    X, content_layers, style_layers)
                contents_l, styles_l, tv_l, l = compute_loss(
                    X, contents_Y_hat, styles_Y_hat, contents_Y, styles_Y_gram)
            l.backward()
            trainer.step(1)
            if (epoch + 1) % lr_decay_epoch == 0:
                trainer.set_learning_rate(trainer.learning_rate * 0.8)
            if (epoch + 1) % 10 == 0:
                animator.axes[1].imshow(postprocess(X).asnumpy())
                animator.add(epoch + 1, [float(sum(contents_l)),
                                         float(sum(styles_l)), float(tv_l)])
        return X



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Now we start to train the model. We rescale the height and width of the
content and style images to 300 by 450 pixels. We use the content image
to initialize the synthesized image.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-31-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-31-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-31-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    device, image_shape = d2l.try_gpu(), (300, 450)  # PIL Image (h, w)
    net = net.to(device)
    content_X, contents_Y = get_contents(image_shape, device)
    _, styles_Y = get_styles(image_shape, device)
    output = train(content_X, contents_Y, styles_Y, device, 0.3, 500, 50)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-31-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    device, image_shape = d2l.try_gpu(), (450, 300)
    net.collect_params().reset_ctx(device)
    content_X, contents_Y = get_contents(image_shape, device)
    _, styles_Y = get_styles(image_shape, device)
    output = train(content_X, contents_Y, styles_Y, device, 0.9, 500, 50)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

We can see that the synthesized image retains the scenery and objects of
the content image, and transfers the color of the style image at the
same time. For example, the synthesized image has blocks of color like
those in the style image. Some of these blocks even have the subtle
texture of brush strokes.

Summary
-------

-  The loss function commonly used in style transfer consists of three
   parts: (i) content loss makes the synthesized image and the content
   image close in content features; (ii) style loss makes the
   synthesized image and style image close in style features; and (iii)
   total variation loss helps to reduce the noise in the synthesized
   image.
-  We can use a pretrained CNN to extract image features and minimize
   the loss function to continuously update the synthesized image as
   model parameters during training.
-  We use Gram matrices to represent the style outputs from the style
   layers.

Exercises
---------

1. How does the output change when you select different content and
   style layers?
2. Adjust the weight hyperparameters in the loss function. Does the
   output retain more content or have less noise?
3. Use different content and style images. Can you create more
   interesting synthesized images?
4. Can we apply style transfer for text? Hint: you may refer to the
   survey paper by :cite:t:`10.1145/3544903.3544906`.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar text"><a href="#pytorch-33-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-33-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-33-0">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/1476>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-33-1">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/378>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>
