
.. _sec_fashion_mnist:

The Image Classification Dataset
================================


One widely used dataset for image classification is the `MNIST
dataset <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MNIST_database>`__
:cite:`LeCun.Bottou.Bengio.ea.1998` of handwritten digits. At the time
of its release in the 1990s it posed a formidable challenge to most
machine learning algorithms, consisting of 60,000 images of
:math:`28 \times 28` pixels resolution (plus a test dataset of 10,000
images). To put things into perspective, back in 1995, a Sun
SPARCStation 5 with a whopping 64MB of RAM and a blistering 5 MFLOPs was
considered state of the art equipment for machine learning at AT&T Bell
Laboratories. Achieving high accuracy on digit recognition was a key
component in automating letter sorting for the USPS in the 1990s. Deep
networks such as LeNet-5 :cite:`LeCun.Jackel.Bottou.ea.1995`, support
vector machines with invariances :cite:`Scholkopf.Burges.Vapnik.1996`,
and tangent distance classifiers :cite:`Simard.LeCun.Denker.ea.1998`
all could reach error rates below 1%.

For over a decade, MNIST served as *the* point of reference for
comparing machine learning algorithms. While it had a good run as a
benchmark dataset, even simple models by todayâ€™s standards achieve
classification accuracy over 95%, making it unsuitable for
distinguishing between strong models and weaker ones. Even more, the
dataset allows for *very* high levels of accuracy, not typically seen in
many classification problems. This skewed algorithmic development
towards specific families of algorithms that can take advantage of clean
datasets, such as active set methods and boundary-seeking active set
algorithms. Today, MNIST serves as more of a sanity check than as a
benchmark. ImageNet :cite:`Deng.Dong.Socher.ea.2009` poses a much more
relevant challenge. Unfortunately, ImageNet is too large for many of the
examples and illustrations in this book, as it would take too long to
train to make the examples interactive. As a substitute we will focus
our discussion in the coming sections on the qualitatively similar, but
much smaller Fashion-MNIST dataset :cite:`Xiao.Rasul.Vollgraf.2017`
which was released in 2017. It contains images of 10 categories of
clothing at :math:`28 \times 28` pixels resolution.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-1-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-1-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-1-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-1-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-1-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import time
    import torch
    import torchvision
    from torchvision import transforms
    from d2l import torch as d2l
    
    d2l.use_svg_display()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-1-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import time
    from mxnet import gluon, npx
    from mxnet.gluon.data.vision import transforms
    from d2l import mxnet as d2l
    
    npx.set_np()
    
    d2l.use_svg_display()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-1-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import time
    import jax
    import numpy as np
    import tensorflow as tf
    import tensorflow_datasets as tfds
    from jax import numpy as jnp
    from d2l import jax as d2l
    
    d2l.use_svg_display()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-1-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import time
    import tensorflow as tf
    from d2l import tensorflow as d2l
    
    d2l.use_svg_display()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Loading the Dataset
-------------------

Since the Fashion-MNIST dataset is so useful, all major frameworks
provide preprocessed versions of it. We can download and read it into
memory using built-in framework utilities.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-3-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-3-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-3-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-3-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-3-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class FashionMNIST(d2l.DataModule):  #@save
        """The Fashion-MNIST dataset."""
        def __init__(self, batch_size=64, resize=(28, 28)):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            trans = transforms.Compose([transforms.Resize(resize),
                                        transforms.ToTensor()])
            self.train = torchvision.datasets.FashionMNIST(
                root=self.root, train=True, transform=trans, download=True)
            self.val = torchvision.datasets.FashionMNIST(
                root=self.root, train=False, transform=trans, download=True)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-3-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class FashionMNIST(d2l.DataModule):  #@save
        """The Fashion-MNIST dataset."""
        def __init__(self, batch_size=64, resize=(28, 28)):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            trans = transforms.Compose([transforms.Resize(resize),
                                        transforms.ToTensor()])
            self.train = gluon.data.vision.FashionMNIST(
                train=True).transform_first(trans)
            self.val = gluon.data.vision.FashionMNIST(
                train=False).transform_first(trans)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-3-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class FashionMNIST(d2l.DataModule):  #@save
        """The Fashion-MNIST dataset."""
        def __init__(self, batch_size=64, resize=(28, 28)):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.train, self.val = tf.keras.datasets.fashion_mnist.load_data()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-3-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class FashionMNIST(d2l.DataModule):  #@save
        """The Fashion-MNIST dataset."""
        def __init__(self, batch_size=64, resize=(28, 28)):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.train, self.val = tf.keras.datasets.fashion_mnist.load_data()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Fashion-MNIST consists of images from 10 categories, each represented by
6000 images in the training dataset and by 1000 in the test dataset. A
*test dataset* is used for evaluating model performance (it must not be
used for training). Consequently the training set and the test set
contain 60,000 and 10,000 images, respectively.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-5-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-5-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-5-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-5-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-5-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = FashionMNIST(resize=(32, 32))
    len(data.train), len(data.val)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-5-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = FashionMNIST(resize=(32, 32))
    len(data.train), len(data.val)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-5-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = FashionMNIST(resize=(32, 32))
    len(data.train[0]), len(data.val[0])



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-5-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = FashionMNIST(resize=(32, 32))
    len(data.train[0]), len(data.val[0])



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

The images are grayscale and upscaled to :math:`32 \times 32` pixels in
resolution above. This is similar to the original MNIST dataset which
consisted of (binary) black and white images. Note, though, that most
modern image data has three channels (red, green, blue) and that
hyperspectral images can have in excess of 100 channels (the HyMap
sensor has 126 channels). By convention we store an image as a
:math:`c \times h \times w` tensor, where :math:`c` is the number of
color channels, :math:`h` is the height and :math:`w` is the width.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data.train[0][0].shape

The categories of Fashion-MNIST have human-understandable names. The
following convenience method converts between numeric labels and their
names.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def text_labels(self, indices):
        """Return text labels."""
        labels = ['t-shirt', 'trouser', 'pullover', 'dress', 'coat',
                  'sandal', 'shirt', 'sneaker', 'bag', 'ankle boot']
        return [labels[int(i)] for i in indices]

Reading a Minibatch
-------------------

To make our life easier when reading from the training and test sets, we
use the built-in data iterator rather than creating one from scratch.
Recall that at each iteration, a data iterator reads a minibatch of data
with size ``batch_size``. We also randomly shuffle the examples for the
training data iterator.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-11-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-11-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-11-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-11-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-11-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def get_dataloader(self, train):
        data = self.train if train else self.val
        return torch.utils.data.DataLoader(data, self.batch_size, shuffle=train,
                                           num_workers=self.num_workers)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-11-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def get_dataloader(self, train):
        data = self.train if train else self.val
        return gluon.data.DataLoader(data, self.batch_size, shuffle=train,
                                     num_workers=self.num_workers)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-11-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def get_dataloader(self, train):
        data = self.train if train else self.val
        process = lambda X, y: (tf.expand_dims(X, axis=3) / 255,
                                tf.cast(y, dtype='int32'))
        resize_fn = lambda X, y: (tf.image.resize_with_pad(X, *self.resize), y)
        shuffle_buf = len(data[0]) if train else 1
        return tfds.as_numpy(
            tf.data.Dataset.from_tensor_slices(process(*data)).batch(
                self.batch_size).map(resize_fn).shuffle(shuffle_buf))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-11-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def get_dataloader(self, train):
        data = self.train if train else self.val
        process = lambda X, y: (tf.expand_dims(X, axis=3) / 255,
                                tf.cast(y, dtype='int32'))
        resize_fn = lambda X, y: (tf.image.resize_with_pad(X, *self.resize), y)
        shuffle_buf = len(data[0]) if train else 1
        return tf.data.Dataset.from_tensor_slices(process(*data)).batch(
            self.batch_size).map(resize_fn).shuffle(shuffle_buf)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

To see how this works, letâ€™s load a minibatch of images by invoking the
``train_dataloader`` method. It contains 64 images.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    X, y = next(iter(data.train_dataloader()))
    print(X.shape, X.dtype, y.shape, y.dtype)

Letâ€™s look at the time it takes to read the images. Even though it is a
built-in loader, it is not blazingly fast. Nonetheless, this is
sufficient since processing images with a deep network takes quite a bit
longer. Hence it is good enough that training a network will not be I/O
constrained.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    tic = time.time()
    for X, y in data.train_dataloader():
        continue
    f'{time.time() - tic:.2f} sec'

Visualization
-------------

We will often be using the Fashion-MNIST dataset. A convenience function
``show_images`` can be used to visualize the images and the associated
labels. Skipping implementation details, we just show the interface
below: we only need to know how to invoke ``d2l.show_images`` rather
than how it works for such utility functions.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def show_images(imgs, num_rows, num_cols, titles=None, scale=1.5):  #@save
        """Plot a list of images."""
        raise NotImplementedError

Letâ€™s put it to good use. In general, it is a good idea to visualize and
inspect data that you are training on. Humans are very good at spotting
oddities and because of that, visualization serves as an additional
safeguard against mistakes and errors in the design of experiments. Here
are the images and their corresponding labels (in text) for the first
few examples in the training dataset.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-19-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-19-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-19-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-19-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-19-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def visualize(self, batch, nrows=1, ncols=8, labels=[]):
        X, y = batch
        if not labels:
            labels = self.text_labels(y)
        d2l.show_images(X.squeeze(1), nrows, ncols, titles=labels)
    batch = next(iter(data.val_dataloader()))
    data.visualize(batch)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-19-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def visualize(self, batch, nrows=1, ncols=8, labels=[]):
        X, y = batch
        if not labels:
            labels = self.text_labels(y)
        d2l.show_images(X.squeeze(1), nrows, ncols, titles=labels)
    batch = next(iter(data.val_dataloader()))
    data.visualize(batch)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-19-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def visualize(self, batch, nrows=1, ncols=8, labels=[]):
        X, y = batch
        if not labels:
            labels = self.text_labels(y)
        d2l.show_images(jnp.squeeze(X), nrows, ncols, titles=labels)
    
    batch = next(iter(data.val_dataloader()))
    data.visualize(batch)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-19-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(FashionMNIST)  #@save
    def visualize(self, batch, nrows=1, ncols=8, labels=[]):
        X, y = batch
        if not labels:
            labels = self.text_labels(y)
        d2l.show_images(tf.squeeze(X), nrows, ncols, titles=labels)
    batch = next(iter(data.val_dataloader()))
    data.visualize(batch)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

We are now ready to work with the Fashion-MNIST dataset in the sections
that follow.

Summary
-------

We now have a slightly more realistic dataset to use for classification.
Fashion-MNIST is an apparel classification dataset consisting of images
representing 10 categories. We will use this dataset in subsequent
sections and chapters to evaluate various network designs, from a simple
linear model to advanced residual networks. As we commonly do with
images, we read them as a tensor of shape (batch size, number of
channels, height, width). For now, we only have one channel as the
images are grayscale (the visualization above uses a false color palette
for improved visibility).

Lastly, data iterators are a key component for efficient performance.
For instance, we might use GPUs for efficient image decompression, video
transcoding, or other preprocessing. Whenever possible, you should rely
on well-implemented data iterators that exploit high-performance
computing to avoid slowing down your training loop.

Exercises
---------

1. Does reducing the ``batch_size`` (for instance, to 1) affect the
   reading performance?
2. The data iterator performance is important. Do you think the current
   implementation is fast enough? Explore various options to improve it.
   Use a system profiler to find out where the bottlenecks are.
3. Check out the frameworkâ€™s online API documentation. Which other
   datasets are available?



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar text"><a href="#pytorch-21-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-21-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-21-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-21-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-21-0">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/49>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-21-1">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/48>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-21-2">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/17980>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-21-3">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/224>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>
