
.. _sec_weight_decay:

Weight Decay
============


Now that we have characterized the problem of overfitting, we can
introduce our first *regularization* technique. Recall that we can
always mitigate overfitting by collecting more training data. However,
that can be costly, time consuming, or entirely out of our control,
making it impossible in the short run. For now, we can assume that we
already have as much high-quality data as our resources permit and focus
the tools at our disposal when the dataset is taken as a given.

Recall that in our polynomial regression example
(:numref:`subsec_polynomial-curve-fitting`) we could limit our model’s
capacity by tweaking the degree of the fitted polynomial. Indeed,
limiting the number of features is a popular technique for mitigating
overfitting. However, simply tossing aside features can be too blunt an
instrument. Sticking with the polynomial regression example, consider
what might happen with high-dimensional input. The natural extensions of
polynomials to multivariate data are called *monomials*, which are
simply products of powers of variables. The degree of a monomial is the
sum of the powers. For example, :math:`x_1^2 x_2`, and :math:`x_3 x_5^2`
are both monomials of degree 3.

Note that the number of terms with degree :math:`d` blows up rapidly as
:math:`d` grows larger. Given :math:`k` variables, the number of
monomials of degree :math:`d` is :math:`{k - 1 + d} \choose {k - 1}`.
Even small changes in degree, say from :math:`2` to :math:`3`,
dramatically increase the complexity of our model. Thus we often need a
more fine-grained tool for adjusting function complexity.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-1-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-1-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-1-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-1-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-1-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import torch
    from torch import nn
    from d2l import torch as d2l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-1-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    from mxnet import autograd, gluon, init, np, npx
    from mxnet.gluon import nn
    from d2l import mxnet as d2l
    
    npx.set_np()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-1-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import jax
    import optax
    from jax import numpy as jnp
    from d2l import jax as d2l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-1-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    %matplotlib inline
    import tensorflow as tf
    from d2l import tensorflow as d2l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Norms and Weight Decay
----------------------

Rather than directly manipulating the number of parameters, *weight
decay*, operates by restricting the values that the parameters can take.
More commonly called :math:`\ell_2` regularization outside of deep
learning circles when optimized by minibatch stochastic gradient
descent, weight decay might be the most widely used technique for
regularizing parametric machine learning models. The technique is
motivated by the basic intuition that among all functions :math:`f`, the
function :math:`f = 0` (assigning the value :math:`0` to all inputs) is
in some sense the *simplest*, and that we can measure the complexity of
a function by the distance of its parameters from zero. But how
precisely should we measure the distance between a function and zero?
There is no single right answer. In fact, entire branches of
mathematics, including parts of functional analysis and the theory of
Banach spaces, are devoted to addressing such issues.

One simple interpretation might be to measure the complexity of a linear
function :math:`f(\mathbf{x}) = \mathbf{w}^\top \mathbf{x}` by some norm
of its weight vector, e.g., :math:`\| \mathbf{w} \|^2`. Recall that we
introduced the :math:`\ell_2` norm and :math:`\ell_1` norm, which are
special cases of the more general :math:`\ell_p` norm, in
:numref:`subsec_lin-algebra-norms`. The most common method for
ensuring a small weight vector is to add its norm as a penalty term to
the problem of minimizing the loss. Thus we replace our original
objective, *minimizing the prediction loss on the training labels*, with
new objective, *minimizing the sum of the prediction loss and the
penalty term*. Now, if our weight vector grows too large, our learning
algorithm might focus on minimizing the weight norm
:math:`\| \mathbf{w} \|^2` rather than minimizing the training error.
That is exactly what we want. To illustrate things in code, we revive
our previous example from :numref:`sec_linear_regression` for linear
regression. There, our loss was given by

.. math:: L(\mathbf{w}, b) = \frac{1}{n}\sum_{i=1}^n \frac{1}{2}\left(\mathbf{w}^\top \mathbf{x}^{(i)} + b - y^{(i)}\right)^2.

Recall that :math:`\mathbf{x}^{(i)}` are the features, :math:`y^{(i)}`
is the label for any data example :math:`i`, and :math:`(\mathbf{w}, b)`
are the weight and bias parameters, respectively. To penalize the size
of the weight vector, we must somehow add :math:`\| \mathbf{w} \|^2` to
the loss function, but how should the model trade off the standard loss
for this new additive penalty? In practice, we characterize this
trade-off via the *regularization constant* :math:`\lambda`, a
nonnegative hyperparameter that we fit using validation data:

.. math:: L(\mathbf{w}, b) + \frac{\lambda}{2} \|\mathbf{w}\|^2.

For :math:`\lambda = 0`, we recover our original loss function. For
:math:`\lambda > 0`, we restrict the size of :math:`\| \mathbf{w} \|`.
We divide by :math:`2` by convention: when we take the derivative of a
quadratic function, the :math:`2` and :math:`1/2` cancel out, ensuring
that the expression for the update looks nice and simple. The astute
reader might wonder why we work with the squared norm and not the
standard norm (i.e., the Euclidean distance). We do this for
computational convenience. By squaring the :math:`\ell_2` norm, we
remove the square root, leaving the sum of squares of each component of
the weight vector. This makes the derivative of the penalty easy to
compute: the sum of derivatives equals the derivative of the sum.

Moreover, you might ask why we work with the :math:`\ell_2` norm in the
first place and not, say, the :math:`\ell_1` norm. In fact, other
choices are valid and popular throughout statistics. While
:math:`\ell_2`-regularized linear models constitute the classic *ridge
regression* algorithm, :math:`\ell_1`-regularized linear regression is a
similarly fundamental method in statistics, popularly known as *lasso
regression*. One reason to work with the :math:`\ell_2` norm is that it
places an outsize penalty on large components of the weight vector. This
biases our learning algorithm towards models that distribute weight
evenly across a larger number of features. In practice, this might make
them more robust to measurement error in a single variable. By contrast,
:math:`\ell_1` penalties lead to models that concentrate weights on a
small set of features by clearing the other weights to zero. This gives
us an effective method for *feature selection*, which may be desirable
for other reasons. For example, if our model only relies on a few
features, then we may not need to collect, store, or transmit data for
the other (dropped) features.

Using the same notation in :eq:`eq_linreg_batch_update`, minibatch
stochastic gradient descent updates for :math:`\ell_2`-regularized
regression as follows:

.. math::

   \begin{aligned}
   \mathbf{w} & \leftarrow \left(1- \eta\lambda \right) \mathbf{w} - \frac{\eta}{|\mathcal{B}|} \sum_{i \in \mathcal{B}} \mathbf{x}^{(i)} \left(\mathbf{w}^\top \mathbf{x}^{(i)} + b - y^{(i)}\right).
   \end{aligned}

As before, we update :math:`\mathbf{w}` based on the amount by which our
estimate differs from the observation. However, we also shrink the size
of :math:`\mathbf{w}` towards zero. That is why the method is sometimes
called “weight decay”: given the penalty term alone, our optimization
algorithm *decays* the weight at each step of training. In contrast to
feature selection, weight decay offers us a mechanism for continuously
adjusting the complexity of a function. Smaller values of
:math:`\lambda` correspond to less constrained :math:`\mathbf{w}`,
whereas larger values of :math:`\lambda` constrain :math:`\mathbf{w}`
more considerably. Whether we include a corresponding bias penalty
:math:`b^2` can vary across implementations, and may vary across layers
of a neural network. Often, we do not regularize the bias term. Besides,
although :math:`\ell_2` regularization may not be equivalent to weight
decay for other optimization algorithms, the idea of regularization
through shrinking the size of weights still holds true.

High-Dimensional Linear Regression
----------------------------------

We can illustrate the benefits of weight decay through a simple
synthetic example.

First, we generate some data as before:

.. math::

   y = 0.05 + \sum_{i = 1}^d 0.01 x_i + \epsilon \textrm{ where }
   \epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 0.01^2).

In this synthetic dataset, our label is given by an underlying linear
function of our inputs, corrupted by Gaussian noise with zero mean and
standard deviation 0.01. For illustrative purposes, we can make the
effects of overfitting pronounced, by increasing the dimensionality of
our problem to :math:`d = 200` and working with a small training set
with only 20 examples.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-3-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-3-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-3-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-3-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-3-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class Data(d2l.DataModule):
        def __init__(self, num_train, num_val, num_inputs, batch_size):
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            n = num_train + num_val
            self.X = torch.randn(n, num_inputs)
            noise = torch.randn(n, 1) * 0.01
            w, b = torch.ones((num_inputs, 1)) * 0.01, 0.05
            self.y = torch.matmul(self.X, w) + b + noise
    
        def get_dataloader(self, train):
            i = slice(0, self.num_train) if train else slice(self.num_train, None)
            return self.get_tensorloader([self.X, self.y], train, i)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-3-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class Data(d2l.DataModule):
        def __init__(self, num_train, num_val, num_inputs, batch_size):
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            n = num_train + num_val
            self.X = np.random.randn(n, num_inputs)
            noise = np.random.randn(n, 1) * 0.01
            w, b = np.ones((num_inputs, 1)) * 0.01, 0.05
            self.y = np.dot(self.X, w) + b + noise
    
        def get_dataloader(self, train):
            i = slice(0, self.num_train) if train else slice(self.num_train, None)
            return self.get_tensorloader([self.X, self.y], train, i)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-3-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class Data(d2l.DataModule):
        def __init__(self, num_train, num_val, num_inputs, batch_size):
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            n = num_train + num_val
            self.X = jax.random.normal(jax.random.PRNGKey(0), (n, num_inputs))
            noise = jax.random.normal(jax.random.PRNGKey(0), (n, 1)) * 0.01
            w, b = jnp.ones((num_inputs, 1)) * 0.01, 0.05
            self.y = jnp.matmul(self.X, w) + b + noise
    
        def get_dataloader(self, train):
            i = slice(0, self.num_train) if train else slice(self.num_train, None)
            return self.get_tensorloader([self.X, self.y], train, i)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-3-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class Data(d2l.DataModule):
        def __init__(self, num_train, num_val, num_inputs, batch_size):
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            n = num_train + num_val
            self.X = tf.random.normal((n, num_inputs))
            noise = tf.random.normal((n, 1)) * 0.01
            w, b = tf.ones((num_inputs, 1)) * 0.01, 0.05
            self.y = tf.matmul(self.X, w) + b + noise
    
        def get_dataloader(self, train):
            i = slice(0, self.num_train) if train else slice(self.num_train, None)
            return self.get_tensorloader([self.X, self.y], train, i)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Implementation from Scratch
---------------------------

Now, let’s try implementing weight decay from scratch. Since minibatch
stochastic gradient descent is our optimizer, we just need to add the
squared :math:`\ell_2` penalty to the original loss function.

Defining :math:`\ell_2` Norm Penalty
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Perhaps the most convenient way of implementing this penalty is to
square all terms in place and sum them.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-5-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-5-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-5-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-5-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-5-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def l2_penalty(w):
        return (w ** 2).sum() / 2



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-5-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def l2_penalty(w):
        return (w ** 2).sum() / 2



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-5-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def l2_penalty(w):
        return (w ** 2).sum() / 2



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-5-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    def l2_penalty(w):
        return tf.reduce_sum(w**2) / 2



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Defining the Model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the final model, the linear regression and the squared loss have not
changed since :numref:`sec_linear_scratch`, so we will just define a
subclass of ``d2l.LinearRegressionScratch``. The only change here is
that our loss now includes the penalty term.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-7-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-7-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-7-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-7-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-7-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecayScratch(d2l.LinearRegressionScratch):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, lambd, lr, sigma=0.01):
            super().__init__(num_inputs, lr, sigma)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
    
        def loss(self, y_hat, y):
            return (super().loss(y_hat, y) +
                    self.lambd * l2_penalty(self.w))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-7-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecayScratch(d2l.LinearRegressionScratch):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, lambd, lr, sigma=0.01):
            super().__init__(num_inputs, lr, sigma)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
    
        def loss(self, y_hat, y):
            return (super().loss(y_hat, y) +
                    self.lambd * l2_penalty(self.w))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-7-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecayScratch(d2l.LinearRegressionScratch):
        lambd: int = 0
    
        def loss(self, params, X, y, state):
            return (super().loss(params, X, y, state) +
                    self.lambd * l2_penalty(params['w']))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-7-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecayScratch(d2l.LinearRegressionScratch):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, lambd, lr, sigma=0.01):
            super().__init__(num_inputs, lr, sigma)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
    
        def loss(self, y_hat, y):
            return (super().loss(y_hat, y) +
                    self.lambd * l2_penalty(self.w))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

The following code fits our model on the training set with 20 examples
and evaluates it on the validation set with 100 examples.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-9-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-9-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-9-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-9-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-9-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = Data(num_train=20, num_val=100, num_inputs=200, batch_size=5)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
    
    def train_scratch(lambd):
        model = WeightDecayScratch(num_inputs=200, lambd=lambd, lr=0.01)
        model.board.yscale='log'
        trainer.fit(model, data)
        print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.w)))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-9-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = Data(num_train=20, num_val=100, num_inputs=200, batch_size=5)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
    
    def train_scratch(lambd):
        model = WeightDecayScratch(num_inputs=200, lambd=lambd, lr=0.01)
        model.board.yscale='log'
        trainer.fit(model, data)
        print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.w)))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-9-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = Data(num_train=20, num_val=100, num_inputs=200, batch_size=5)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
    
    def train_scratch(lambd):
        model = WeightDecayScratch(num_inputs=200, lambd=lambd, lr=0.01)
        model.board.yscale='log'
        trainer.fit(model, data)
        print('L2 norm of w:',
              float(l2_penalty(trainer.state.params['w'])))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-9-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = Data(num_train=20, num_val=100, num_inputs=200, batch_size=5)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=10)
    
    def train_scratch(lambd):
        model = WeightDecayScratch(num_inputs=200, lambd=lambd, lr=0.01)
        model.board.yscale='log'
        trainer.fit(model, data)
        print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.w)))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Training without Regularization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We now run this code with ``lambd = 0``, disabling weight decay. Note
that we overfit badly, decreasing the training error but not the
validation error—a textbook case of overfitting.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    train_scratch(0)

Using Weight Decay
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below, we run with substantial weight decay. Note that the training
error increases but the validation error decreases. This is precisely
the effect we expect from regularization.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    train_scratch(3)

Concise Implementation
----------------------

Because weight decay is ubiquitous in neural network optimization, the
deep learning framework makes it especially convenient, integrating
weight decay into the optimization algorithm itself for easy use in
combination with any loss function. Moreover, this integration serves a
computational benefit, allowing implementation tricks to add weight
decay to the algorithm, without any additional computational overhead.
Since the weight decay portion of the update depends only on the current
value of each parameter, the optimizer must touch each parameter once
anyway.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar text"><a href="#pytorch-15-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-15-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-15-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-15-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-15-0">

Below, we specify the weight decay hyperparameter directly through
``weight_decay`` when instantiating our optimizer. By default, PyTorch
decays both weights and biases simultaneously, but we can configure the
optimizer to handle different parameters according to different
policies. Here, we only set ``weight_decay`` for the weights (the
``net.weight`` parameters), hence the bias (the ``net.bias`` parameter)
will not decay.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecay(d2l.LinearRegression):
        def __init__(self, wd, lr):
            super().__init__(lr)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.wd = wd
    
        def configure_optimizers(self):
            return torch.optim.SGD([
                {'params': self.net.weight, 'weight_decay': self.wd},
                {'params': self.net.bias}], lr=self.lr)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-15-1">

Below, we specify the weight decay hyperparameter directly through
``wd`` when instantiating our ``Trainer``. By default, Gluon decays both
weights and biases simultaneously. Note that the hyperparameter ``wd``
will be multiplied by ``wd_mult`` when updating model parameters. Thus,
if we set ``wd_mult`` to zero, the bias parameter :math:`b` will not
decay.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecay(d2l.LinearRegression):
        def __init__(self, wd, lr):
            super().__init__(lr)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.wd = wd
    
        def configure_optimizers(self):
            self.collect_params('.*bias').setattr('wd_mult', 0)
            return gluon.Trainer(self.collect_params(),
                                 'sgd',
                                 {'learning_rate': self.lr, 'wd': self.wd})



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-15-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecay(d2l.LinearRegression):
        wd: int = 0
    
        def configure_optimizers(self):
            # Weight Decay is not available directly within optax.sgd, but
            # optax allows chaining several transformations together
            return optax.chain(optax.additive_weight_decay(self.wd),
                               optax.sgd(self.lr))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-15-3">

Below, we create an :math:`\ell_2` regularizer with the weight decay
hyperparameter ``wd`` and apply it to the layer’s weights through the
``kernel_regularizer`` argument.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class WeightDecay(d2l.LinearRegression):
        def __init__(self, wd, lr):
            super().__init__(lr)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.net = tf.keras.layers.Dense(
                1, kernel_regularizer=tf.keras.regularizers.l2(wd),
                kernel_initializer=tf.keras.initializers.RandomNormal(0, 0.01)
            )
    
        def loss(self, y_hat, y):
            return super().loss(y_hat, y) + self.net.losses



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

The plot looks similar to that when we implemented weight decay from
scratch. However, this version runs faster and is easier to implement,
benefits that will become more pronounced as you address larger problems
and this work becomes more routine.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-17-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-17-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-17-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-17-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-17-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    model = WeightDecay(wd=3, lr=0.01)
    model.board.yscale='log'
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.get_w_b()[0])))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-17-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    model = WeightDecay(wd=3, lr=0.01)
    model.board.yscale='log'
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.get_w_b()[0])))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-17-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    model = WeightDecay(wd=3, lr=0.01)
    model.board.yscale='log'
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.get_w_b(trainer.state)[0])))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-17-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    model = WeightDecay(wd=3, lr=0.01)
    model.board.yscale='log'
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    print('L2 norm of w:', float(l2_penalty(model.get_w_b()[0])))



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

So far, we have touched upon one notion of what constitutes a simple
linear function. However, even for simple nonlinear functions, the
situation can be much more complex. To see this, the concept of
`reproducing kernel Hilbert space
(RKHS) <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducing_kernel_Hilbert_space>`__
allows one to apply tools introduced for linear functions in a nonlinear
context. Unfortunately, RKHS-based algorithms tend to scale poorly to
large, high-dimensional data. In this book we will often adopt the
common heuristic whereby weight decay is applied to all layers of a deep
network.

Summary
-------

Regularization is a common method for dealing with overfitting.
Classical regularization techniques add a penalty term to the loss
function (when training) to reduce the complexity of the learned model.
One particular choice for keeping the model simple is using an
:math:`\ell_2` penalty. This leads to weight decay in the update steps
of the minibatch stochastic gradient descent algorithm. In practice, the
weight decay functionality is provided in optimizers from deep learning
frameworks. Different sets of parameters can have different update
behaviors within the same training loop.

Exercises
---------

1. Experiment with the value of :math:`\lambda` in the estimation
   problem in this section. Plot training and validation accuracy as a
   function of :math:`\lambda`. What do you observe?
2. Use a validation set to find the optimal value of :math:`\lambda`. Is
   it really the optimal value? Does this matter?
3. What would the update equations look like if instead of
   :math:`\|\mathbf{w}\|^2` we used :math:`\sum_i |w_i|` as our penalty
   of choice (:math:`\ell_1` regularization)?
4. We know that :math:`\|\mathbf{w}\|^2 = \mathbf{w}^\top \mathbf{w}`.
   Can you find a similar equation for matrices (see the Frobenius norm
   in :numref:`subsec_lin-algebra-norms`)?
5. Review the relationship between training error and generalization
   error. In addition to weight decay, increased training, and the use
   of a model of suitable complexity, what other ways might help us deal
   with overfitting?
6. In Bayesian statistics we use the product of prior and likelihood to
   arrive at a posterior via
   :math:`P(w \mid x) \propto P(x \mid w) P(w)`. How can you identify
   :math:`P(w)` with regularization?



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar text"><a href="#pytorch-19-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-19-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-19-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-19-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-19-0">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/99>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-19-1">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/98>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-19-2">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/17979>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-19-3">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/236>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>
