
.. _sec_lstm:

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
=============================


Shortly after the first Elman-style RNNs were trained using
backpropagation :cite:`elman1990finding`, the problems of learning
long-term dependencies (owing to vanishing and exploding gradients)
became salient, with Bengio and Hochreiter discussing the problem
:cite:`bengio1994learning,Hochreiter.Bengio.Frasconi.ea.2001`.
Hochreiter had articulated this problem as early as 1991 in his Master’s
thesis, although the results were not widely known because the thesis
was written in German. While gradient clipping helps with exploding
gradients, handling vanishing gradients appears to require a more
elaborate solution. One of the first and most successful techniques for
addressing vanishing gradients came in the form of the long short-term
memory (LSTM) model due to :cite:t:`Hochreiter.Schmidhuber.1997`. LSTMs
resemble standard recurrent neural networks but here each ordinary
recurrent node is replaced by a *memory cell*. Each memory cell contains
an *internal state*, i.e., a node with a self-connected recurrent edge
of fixed weight 1, ensuring that the gradient can pass across many time
steps without vanishing or exploding.

The term “long short-term memory” comes from the following intuition.
Simple recurrent neural networks have *long-term memory* in the form of
weights. The weights change slowly during training, encoding general
knowledge about the data. They also have *short-term memory* in the form
of ephemeral activations, which pass from each node to successive nodes.
The LSTM model introduces an intermediate type of storage via the memory
cell. A memory cell is a composite unit, built from simpler nodes in a
specific connectivity pattern, with the novel inclusion of
multiplicative nodes.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-1-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-1-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-1-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-1-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-1-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    import torch
    from torch import nn
    from d2l import torch as d2l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-1-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    from mxnet import np, npx
    from mxnet.gluon import rnn
    from d2l import mxnet as d2l
    
    npx.set_np()



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-1-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    import jax
    from flax import linen as nn
    from jax import numpy as jnp
    from d2l import jax as d2l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-1-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    import tensorflow as tf
    from d2l import tensorflow as d2l



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Gated Memory Cell
-----------------

Each memory cell is equipped with an *internal state* and a number of
multiplicative gates that determine whether (i) a given input should
impact the internal state (the *input gate*), (ii) the internal state
should be flushed to :math:`0` (the *forget gate*), and (iii) the
internal state of a given neuron should be allowed to impact the cell’s
output (the *output* gate).

Gated Hidden State
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The key distinction between vanilla RNNs and LSTMs is that the latter
support gating of the hidden state. This means that we have dedicated
mechanisms for when a hidden state should be *updated* and also for when
it should be *reset*. These mechanisms are learned and they address the
concerns listed above. For instance, if the first token is of great
importance we will learn not to update the hidden state after the first
observation. Likewise, we will learn to skip irrelevant temporary
observations. Last, we will learn to reset the latent state whenever
needed. We discuss this in detail below.

Input Gate, Forget Gate, and Output Gate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The data feeding into the LSTM gates are the input at the current time
step and the hidden state of the previous time step, as illustrated in
:numref:`fig_lstm_0`. Three fully connected layers with sigmoid
activation functions compute the values of the input, forget, and output
gates. As a result of the sigmoid activation, all values of the three
gates are in the range of :math:`(0, 1)`. Additionally, we require an
*input node*, typically computed with a *tanh* activation function.
Intuitively, the *input gate* determines how much of the input node’s
value should be added to the current memory cell internal state. The
*forget gate* determines whether to keep the current value of the memory
or flush it. And the *output gate* determines whether the memory cell
should influence the output at the current time step.

.. _fig_lstm_0:

.. figure:: ../img/lstm-0.svg

   Computing the input gate, the forget gate, and the output gate in an
   LSTM model.


Mathematically, suppose that there are :math:`h` hidden units, the batch
size is :math:`n`, and the number of inputs is :math:`d`. Thus, the
input is :math:`\mathbf{X}_t \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times d}` and the hidden
state of the previous time step is
:math:`\mathbf{H}_{t-1} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}`. Correspondingly,
the gates at time step :math:`t` are defined as follows: the input gate
is :math:`\mathbf{I}_t \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}`, the forget gate is
:math:`\mathbf{F}_t \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}`, and the output gate is
:math:`\mathbf{O}_t \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}`. They are calculated as
follows:

.. math::


   \begin{aligned}
   \mathbf{I}_t &= \sigma(\mathbf{X}_t \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xi}} + \mathbf{H}_{t-1} \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{hi}} + \mathbf{b}_\textrm{i}),\\
   \mathbf{F}_t &= \sigma(\mathbf{X}_t \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xf}} + \mathbf{H}_{t-1} \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{hf}} + \mathbf{b}_\textrm{f}),\\
   \mathbf{O}_t &= \sigma(\mathbf{X}_t \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xo}} + \mathbf{H}_{t-1} \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{ho}} + \mathbf{b}_\textrm{o}),
   \end{aligned}

where
:math:`\mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xi}}, \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xf}}, \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xo}} \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times h}`
and
:math:`\mathbf{W}_{\textrm{hi}}, \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{hf}}, \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{ho}} \in \mathbb{R}^{h \times h}`
are weight parameters and
:math:`\mathbf{b}_\textrm{i}, \mathbf{b}_\textrm{f}, \mathbf{b}_\textrm{o} \in \mathbb{R}^{1 \times h}`
are bias parameters. Note that broadcasting (see
:numref:`subsec_broadcasting`) is triggered during the summation. We
use sigmoid functions (as introduced in :numref:`sec_mlp`) to map the
input values to the interval :math:`(0, 1)`.

Input Node
~~~~~~~~~~

Next we design the memory cell. Since we have not specified the action
of the various gates yet, we first introduce the *input node*
:math:`\tilde{\mathbf{C}}_t \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}`. Its
computation is similar to that of the three gates described above, but
uses a :math:`\tanh` function with a value range for :math:`(-1, 1)` as
the activation function. This leads to the following equation at time
step :math:`t`:

.. math:: \tilde{\mathbf{C}}_t = \textrm{tanh}(\mathbf{X}_t \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xc}} + \mathbf{H}_{t-1} \mathbf{W}_{\textrm{hc}} + \mathbf{b}_\textrm{c}),

where :math:`\mathbf{W}_{\textrm{xc}} \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times h}` and
:math:`\mathbf{W}_{\textrm{hc}} \in \mathbb{R}^{h \times h}` are weight
parameters and :math:`\mathbf{b}_\textrm{c} \in \mathbb{R}^{1 \times h}`
is a bias parameter.

A quick illustration of the input node is shown in
:numref:`fig_lstm_1`.

.. _fig_lstm_1:

.. figure:: ../img/lstm-1.svg

   Computing the input node in an LSTM model.


Memory Cell Internal State
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In LSTMs, the input gate :math:`\mathbf{I}_t` governs how much we take
new data into account via :math:`\tilde{\mathbf{C}}_t` and the forget
gate :math:`\mathbf{F}_t` addresses how much of the old cell internal
state :math:`\mathbf{C}_{t-1} \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}` we retain.
Using the Hadamard (elementwise) product operator :math:`\odot` we
arrive at the following update equation:

.. math:: \mathbf{C}_t = \mathbf{F}_t \odot \mathbf{C}_{t-1} + \mathbf{I}_t \odot \tilde{\mathbf{C}}_t.

If the forget gate is always 1 and the input gate is always 0, the
memory cell internal state :math:`\mathbf{C}_{t-1}` will remain constant
forever, passing unchanged to each subsequent time step. However, input
gates and forget gates give the model the flexibility of being able to
learn when to keep this value unchanged and when to perturb it in
response to subsequent inputs. In practice, this design alleviates the
vanishing gradient problem, resulting in models that are much easier to
train, especially when facing datasets with long sequence lengths.

We thus arrive at the flow diagram in :numref:`fig_lstm_2`.

.. _fig_lstm_2:

.. figure:: ../img/lstm-2.svg

   Computing the memory cell internal state in an LSTM model.


Hidden State
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Last, we need to define how to compute the output of the memory cell,
i.e., the hidden state :math:`\mathbf{H}_t \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times h}`,
as seen by other layers. This is where the output gate comes into play.
In LSTMs, we first apply :math:`\tanh` to the memory cell internal state
and then apply another point-wise multiplication, this time with the
output gate. This ensures that the values of :math:`\mathbf{H}_t` are
always in the interval :math:`(-1, 1)`:

.. math:: \mathbf{H}_t = \mathbf{O}_t \odot \tanh(\mathbf{C}_t).

Whenever the output gate is close to 1, we allow the memory cell
internal state to impact the subsequent layers uninhibited, whereas for
output gate values close to 0, we prevent the current memory from
impacting other layers of the network at the current time step. Note
that a memory cell can accrue information across many time steps without
impacting the rest of the network (as long as the output gate takes
values close to 0), and then suddenly impact the network at a subsequent
time step as soon as the output gate flips from values close to 0 to
values close to 1. :numref:`fig_lstm_3` has a graphical illustration
of the data flow.

.. _fig_lstm_3:

.. figure:: ../img/lstm-3.svg

   Computing the hidden state in an LSTM model.


Implementation from Scratch
---------------------------

Now let’s implement an LSTM from scratch. As same as the experiments in
:numref:`sec_rnn-scratch`, we first load *The Time Machine* dataset.

Initializing Model Parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, we need to define and initialize the model parameters. As
previously, the hyperparameter ``num_hiddens`` dictates the number of
hidden units. We initialize weights following a Gaussian distribution
with 0.01 standard deviation, and we set the biases to 0.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-3-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-3-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-3-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-3-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-3-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTMScratch(d2l.Module):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, num_hiddens, sigma=0.01):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
    
            init_weight = lambda *shape: nn.Parameter(torch.randn(*shape) * sigma)
            triple = lambda: (init_weight(num_inputs, num_hiddens),
                              init_weight(num_hiddens, num_hiddens),
                              nn.Parameter(torch.zeros(num_hiddens)))
            self.W_xi, self.W_hi, self.b_i = triple()  # Input gate
            self.W_xf, self.W_hf, self.b_f = triple()  # Forget gate
            self.W_xo, self.W_ho, self.b_o = triple()  # Output gate
            self.W_xc, self.W_hc, self.b_c = triple()  # Input node

The actual model is defined as described above, consisting of three
gates and an input node. Note that only the hidden state is passed to
the output layer.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(LSTMScratch)
    def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
        if H_C is None:
            # Initial state with shape: (batch_size, num_hiddens)
            H = torch.zeros((inputs.shape[1], self.num_hiddens),
                          device=inputs.device)
            C = torch.zeros((inputs.shape[1], self.num_hiddens),
                          device=inputs.device)
        else:
            H, C = H_C
        outputs = []
        for X in inputs:
            I = torch.sigmoid(torch.matmul(X, self.W_xi) +
                            torch.matmul(H, self.W_hi) + self.b_i)
            F = torch.sigmoid(torch.matmul(X, self.W_xf) +
                            torch.matmul(H, self.W_hf) + self.b_f)
            O = torch.sigmoid(torch.matmul(X, self.W_xo) +
                            torch.matmul(H, self.W_ho) + self.b_o)
            C_tilde = torch.tanh(torch.matmul(X, self.W_xc) +
                               torch.matmul(H, self.W_hc) + self.b_c)
            C = F * C + I * C_tilde
            H = O * torch.tanh(C)
            outputs.append(H)
        return outputs, (H, C)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-3-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTMScratch(d2l.Module):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, num_hiddens, sigma=0.01):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
    
            init_weight = lambda *shape: np.random.randn(*shape) * sigma
            triple = lambda: (init_weight(num_inputs, num_hiddens),
                              init_weight(num_hiddens, num_hiddens),
                              np.zeros(num_hiddens))
            self.W_xi, self.W_hi, self.b_i = triple()  # Input gate
            self.W_xf, self.W_hf, self.b_f = triple()  # Forget gate
            self.W_xo, self.W_ho, self.b_o = triple()  # Output gate
            self.W_xc, self.W_hc, self.b_c = triple()  # Input node

The actual model is defined as described above, consisting of three
gates and an input node. Note that only the hidden state is passed to
the output layer.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(LSTMScratch)
    def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
        if H_C is None:
            # Initial state with shape: (batch_size, num_hiddens)
            H = np.zeros((inputs.shape[1], self.num_hiddens),
                          ctx=inputs.ctx)
            C = np.zeros((inputs.shape[1], self.num_hiddens),
                          ctx=inputs.ctx)
        else:
            H, C = H_C
        outputs = []
        for X in inputs:
            I = npx.sigmoid(np.dot(X, self.W_xi) +
                            np.dot(H, self.W_hi) + self.b_i)
            F = npx.sigmoid(np.dot(X, self.W_xf) +
                            np.dot(H, self.W_hf) + self.b_f)
            O = npx.sigmoid(np.dot(X, self.W_xo) +
                            np.dot(H, self.W_ho) + self.b_o)
            C_tilde = np.tanh(np.dot(X, self.W_xc) +
                               np.dot(H, self.W_hc) + self.b_c)
            C = F * C + I * C_tilde
            H = O * np.tanh(C)
            outputs.append(H)
        return outputs, (H, C)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-3-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTMScratch(d2l.Module):
        num_inputs: int
        num_hiddens: int
        sigma: float = 0.01
    
        def setup(self):
            init_weight = lambda name, shape: self.param(name,
                                                         nn.initializers.normal(self.sigma),
                                                         shape)
            triple = lambda name : (
                init_weight(f'W_x{name}', (self.num_inputs, self.num_hiddens)),
                init_weight(f'W_h{name}', (self.num_hiddens, self.num_hiddens)),
                self.param(f'b_{name}', nn.initializers.zeros, (self.num_hiddens)))
    
            self.W_xi, self.W_hi, self.b_i = triple('i')  # Input gate
            self.W_xf, self.W_hf, self.b_f = triple('f')  # Forget gate
            self.W_xo, self.W_ho, self.b_o = triple('o')  # Output gate
            self.W_xc, self.W_hc, self.b_c = triple('c')  # Input node

The actual model is defined as described above, consisting of three
gates and an input node. Note that only the hidden state is passed to
the output layer. A long for-loop in the ``forward`` method will result
in an extremely long JIT compilation time for the first run. As a
solution to this, instead of using a for-loop to update the state with
every time step, JAX has ``jax.lax.scan`` utility transformation to
achieve the same behavior. It takes in an initial state called ``carry``
and an ``inputs`` array which is scanned on its leading axis. The
``scan`` transformation ultimately returns the final state and the
stacked outputs as expected.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(LSTMScratch)
    def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
        # Use lax.scan primitive instead of looping over the
        # inputs, since scan saves time in jit compilation.
        def scan_fn(carry, X):
            H, C = carry
            I = jax.nn.sigmoid(jnp.matmul(X, self.W_xi) + (
                jnp.matmul(H, self.W_hi)) + self.b_i)
            F = jax.nn.sigmoid(jnp.matmul(X, self.W_xf) +
                            jnp.matmul(H, self.W_hf) + self.b_f)
            O = jax.nn.sigmoid(jnp.matmul(X, self.W_xo) +
                            jnp.matmul(H, self.W_ho) + self.b_o)
            C_tilde = jnp.tanh(jnp.matmul(X, self.W_xc) +
                               jnp.matmul(H, self.W_hc) + self.b_c)
            C = F * C + I * C_tilde
            H = O * jnp.tanh(C)
            return (H, C), H  # return carry, y
    
        if H_C is None:
            batch_size = inputs.shape[1]
            carry = jnp.zeros((batch_size, self.num_hiddens)), \
                    jnp.zeros((batch_size, self.num_hiddens))
        else:
            carry = H_C
    
        # scan takes the scan_fn, initial carry state, xs with leading axis to be scanned
        carry, outputs = jax.lax.scan(scan_fn, carry, inputs)
        return outputs, carry



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-3-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTMScratch(d2l.Module):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, num_hiddens, sigma=0.01):
            super().__init__()
            self.save_hyperparameters()
    
            init_weight = lambda *shape: tf.Variable(tf.random.normal(shape) * sigma)
            triple = lambda: (init_weight(num_inputs, num_hiddens),
                              init_weight(num_hiddens, num_hiddens),
                              tf.Variable(tf.zeros(num_hiddens)))
    
            self.W_xi, self.W_hi, self.b_i = triple()  # Input gate
            self.W_xf, self.W_hf, self.b_f = triple()  # Forget gate
            self.W_xo, self.W_ho, self.b_o = triple()  # Output gate
            self.W_xc, self.W_hc, self.b_c = triple()  # Input node

The actual model is defined as described above, consisting of three
gates and an input node. Note that only the hidden state is passed to
the output layer.

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    @d2l.add_to_class(LSTMScratch)
    def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
        if H_C is None:
            # Initial state with shape: (batch_size, num_hiddens)
            H = tf.zeros((inputs.shape[1], self.num_hiddens))
            C = tf.zeros((inputs.shape[1], self.num_hiddens))
        else:
            H, C = H_C
        outputs = []
        for X in inputs:
            I = tf.sigmoid(tf.matmul(X, self.W_xi) +
                            tf.matmul(H, self.W_hi) + self.b_i)
            F = tf.sigmoid(tf.matmul(X, self.W_xf) +
                            tf.matmul(H, self.W_hf) + self.b_f)
            O = tf.sigmoid(tf.matmul(X, self.W_xo) +
                            tf.matmul(H, self.W_ho) + self.b_o)
            C_tilde = tf.tanh(tf.matmul(X, self.W_xc) +
                               tf.matmul(H, self.W_hc) + self.b_c)
            C = F * C + I * C_tilde
            H = O * tf.tanh(C)
            outputs.append(H)
        return outputs, (H, C)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Training and Prediction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s train an LSTM model by instantiating the ``RNNLMScratch`` class
from :numref:`sec_rnn-scratch`.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-5-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-5-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-5-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-5-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-5-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = d2l.TimeMachine(batch_size=1024, num_steps=32)
    lstm = LSTMScratch(num_inputs=len(data.vocab), num_hiddens=32)
    model = d2l.RNNLMScratch(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=50, gradient_clip_val=1, num_gpus=1)
    trainer.fit(model, data)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-5-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = d2l.TimeMachine(batch_size=1024, num_steps=32)
    lstm = LSTMScratch(num_inputs=len(data.vocab), num_hiddens=32)
    model = d2l.RNNLMScratch(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=50, gradient_clip_val=1, num_gpus=1)
    trainer.fit(model, data)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-5-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = d2l.TimeMachine(batch_size=1024, num_steps=32)
    lstm = LSTMScratch(num_inputs=len(data.vocab), num_hiddens=32)
    model = d2l.RNNLMScratch(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=50, gradient_clip_val=1, num_gpus=1)
    trainer.fit(model, data)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-5-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    data = d2l.TimeMachine(batch_size=1024, num_steps=32)
    with d2l.try_gpu():
        lstm = LSTMScratch(num_inputs=len(data.vocab), num_hiddens=32)
        model = d2l.RNNLMScratch(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer = d2l.Trainer(max_epochs=50, gradient_clip_val=1)
    trainer.fit(model, data)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

Concise Implementation
----------------------

Using high-level APIs, we can directly instantiate an LSTM model. This
encapsulates all the configuration details that we made explicit above.
The code is significantly faster as it uses compiled operators rather
than Python for many details that we spelled out before.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar code"><a href="#pytorch-7-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-7-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-7-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-7-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-7-0">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTM(d2l.RNN):
        def __init__(self, num_inputs, num_hiddens):
            d2l.Module.__init__(self)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.rnn = nn.LSTM(num_inputs, num_hiddens)
    
        def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
            return self.rnn(inputs, H_C)
    
    lstm = LSTM(num_inputs=len(data.vocab), num_hiddens=32)
    model = d2l.RNNLM(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    model.predict('it has', 20, data.vocab, d2l.try_gpu())



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-7-1">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTM(d2l.RNN):
        def __init__(self, num_hiddens):
            d2l.Module.__init__(self)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.rnn = rnn.LSTM(num_hiddens)
    
        def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
            if H_C is None: H_C = self.rnn.begin_state(
                inputs.shape[1], ctx=inputs.ctx)
            return self.rnn(inputs, H_C)
    
    lstm = LSTM(num_hiddens=32)
    model = d2l.RNNLM(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    model.predict('it has', 20, data.vocab, d2l.try_gpu())



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-7-2">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTM(d2l.RNN):
        num_hiddens: int
    
        @nn.compact
        def __call__(self, inputs, H_C=None, training=False):
            if H_C is None:
                batch_size = inputs.shape[1]
                H_C = nn.OptimizedLSTMCell.initialize_carry(jax.random.PRNGKey(0),
                                                            (batch_size,),
                                                            self.num_hiddens)
    
            LSTM = nn.scan(nn.OptimizedLSTMCell, variable_broadcast="params",
                           in_axes=0, out_axes=0, split_rngs={"params": False})
    
            H_C, outputs = LSTM()(H_C, inputs)
            return outputs, H_C
    
    lstm = LSTM(num_hiddens=32)
    model = d2l.RNNLM(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    model.predict('it has', 20, data.vocab, trainer.state.params)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-7-3">

.. raw:: latex

   \diilbookstyleinputcell

.. code:: python

    class LSTM(d2l.RNN):
        def __init__(self, num_hiddens):
            d2l.Module.__init__(self)
            self.save_hyperparameters()
            self.rnn = tf.keras.layers.LSTM(
                    num_hiddens, return_sequences=True,
                    return_state=True, time_major=True)
    
        def forward(self, inputs, H_C=None):
            outputs, *H_C = self.rnn(inputs, H_C)
            return outputs, H_C
    
    lstm = LSTM(num_hiddens=32)
    with d2l.try_gpu():
        model = d2l.RNNLM(lstm, vocab_size=len(data.vocab), lr=4)
    trainer.fit(model, data)
    
    model.predict('it has', 20, data.vocab)



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>

LSTMs are the prototypical latent variable autoregressive model with
nontrivial state control. Many variants thereof have been proposed over
the years, e.g., multiple layers, residual connections, different types
of regularization. However, training LSTMs and other sequence models
(such as GRUs) is quite costly because of the long range dependency of
the sequence. Later we will encounter alternative models such as
Transformers that can be used in some cases.

Summary
-------

While LSTMs were published in 1997, they rose to great prominence with
some victories in prediction competitions in the mid-2000s, and became
the dominant models for sequence learning from 2011 until the rise of
Transformer models, starting in 2017. Even Tranformers owe some of their
key ideas to architecture design innovations introduced by the LSTM.

LSTMs have three types of gates: input gates, forget gates, and output
gates that control the flow of information. The hidden layer output of
LSTM includes the hidden state and the memory cell internal state. Only
the hidden state is passed into the output layer while the memory cell
internal state remains entirely internal. LSTMs can alleviate vanishing
and exploding gradients.

Exercises
---------

1. Adjust the hyperparameters and analyze their influence on running
   time, perplexity, and the output sequence.
2. How would you need to change the model to generate proper words
   rather than just sequences of characters?
3. Compare the computational cost for GRUs, LSTMs, and regular RNNs for
   a given hidden dimension. Pay special attention to the training and
   inference cost.
4. Since the candidate memory cell ensures that the value range is
   between :math:`-1` and :math:`1` by using the :math:`\tanh` function,
   why does the hidden state need to use the :math:`\tanh` function
   again to ensure that the output value range is between :math:`-1` and
   :math:`1`?
5. Implement an LSTM model for time series prediction rather than
   character sequence prediction.



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs mdl-js-tabs mdl-js-ripple-effect"><div class="mdl-tabs__tab-bar text"><a href="#pytorch-9-0" onclick="tagClick('pytorch'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab is-active">pytorch</a><a href="#mxnet-9-1" onclick="tagClick('mxnet'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">mxnet</a><a href="#jax-9-2" onclick="tagClick('jax'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">jax</a><a href="#tensorflow-9-3" onclick="tagClick('tensorflow'); return false;" class="mdl-tabs__tab ">tensorflow</a></div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel is-active" id="pytorch-9-0">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/1057>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="mxnet-9-1">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/343>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="jax-9-2">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/18016>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    <div class="mdl-tabs__panel " id="tensorflow-9-3">

`Discussions <https://discuss.d2l.ai/t/3861>`__



.. raw:: html

    </div>



.. raw:: html

    </div>
